yo what's up sometimes I say I'm going
to make a short video and then about 15
minutes into it I regret that I said
that at the beginning but this is a
pretty narrowly defined topic I want to
address in this one monologue so I think
it should be short in politics in
political science what is arbitrary is
not necessarily evil the fact that
something is arbitrary doesn't mean it's
wrong doesn't mean it's bad and doesn't
mean it's ineffective I think you'll see
why I raised this issue if you stick
with me for just a minute here one of
the real strengths of habitat
conservation as a paradigm as an
approach to social change to saving the
world whatever you want to say within
ecology habitat conservation relies on
laws that are very simple and very
arbitrary so you have 10 people in a
room looking at a map they take a pencil
and they draw a line on that map the
line may be completely arbitrary on one
side of the line cutting down a tree is
a criminal offence on the other side of
the line it's completely permissible so
you have an arbitrary legal distinction
that saves the lives of animals that
preserves habitats that may have many
more complex downstream effects we use
this term in ecology downstream effects
knock-on effects in direct positive
effects but fundamentally you are
talking about something that is
arbitrary that is human created it's you
know we over use this concept so much of
speciesism you know yeah these are ideas
human beings have their anthropocentric
whatever you want to say nobody went out
and interviewed the animals in the
forest it's probably not going to be
based on any kind of biological fact
that can be dug up in the earth and
proven scientifically human beings come
together they have a convention they
have a debate they have some kind of
political process preferably democratic
and then decide okay guys here's the
square on the map inside that square
nobody's allowed to cut down any trees
nobody
to kill any animals vegans are very
often criticized for relying on
arbitrary moral distinctions um by
vegetarians by flexitarian by people who
have some kind of intermediate position
I'm left-wing social justice types who
maybe share some of the aspirations for
a better world with vegans but who are
not willing to buy into the ethical and
ecological underpinnings of veganism in
21st century they will point out things
such as they will argue that look there
are many many types of harm there are
many many types of damage being done to
the world and you as a vegan you have
arbitrarily drawn a line and you said
this is the harm i'm willing to tolerate
and this other harm i'm not willing to
tolerate this is what i'm willing to be
complicit in and this is something else
is not now what examples they choose to
use it doesn't really matter they may
say well you know mercury mercury
pollution is a big problem and you as a
vegan you don't do anything about it yes
say your line is drawn in a way that
doesn't relate that they may raise some
of these really boring examples of what
about the exploited laborers on fruit
farms they may raise the issue of
pesticides and this is also interesting
but you know yup vegans we certainly
tolerate pesticides along with longer
throw with the rest the recipe whether
or not some vegans want to pretend we
don't kill insects so this sort of
person if they're inclined towards sort
of social justice view of the world
their complaint may be that this is
arbitrary and I think the real profound
response to that is to say yes in
politics many many distinctions are
arbitrary but arbitrary doesn't mean
evil arbitrary doesn't mean wrong the
question is is it effective
now when you get into the morality of
war there are often arbitrary standards
of Human Rights the seemed unbelievable
you know why are you not allowed to
place artillery guns on a riverbank it
why why is this torture and something
else is not torture but the fundamental
achievement you have to struggle for is
having a written agreement having a
convention like the Geneva Convention
having a written convention where ten
people have set stood around a table and
said okay let's decide what's torture
even if what they decide is wrong even
if the definition they use is terrible
at least you have that fundamental first
step of people agreeing there is a line
we're going to draw a line even if
incorrectly even if arbitrarily and you
can negotiate the details later you can
move the line later you can say you know
what when we came up with this
convention nobody thought about giving
prisoners mind-altering drugs which
there's a scary history of anyway you
know um I did some research on that in
the history of China 20th century China
of you know people being put in prisons
and drugged it's ugly it's a form of
torture okay so you know our original
definition of torture maybe it only
dealt with cruel and unusual punishment
but now we need to think about what that
really means we need to elaborate this
we need to draw the line more clearly
what have you the ethics of war and
combat these things were designed at a
time when satellites were not located in
outer space when many many things the
world changed okay we need to reconsider
this we need to debate and so on the
fact that the line is arbitrary doesn't
invalidate that discourse on the
contrary it's the most fundamental basis
for the whole discourse there's a saying
in political science in debating
legislature people like to say many
people have said this is not a quote
from one man so if you google it you
might see it your own person all
legislation is based on animus animus is
a fancy word basically for hatred and
the point
saying that is look if I'm in a debate
with you and you say to me look your law
is arbitrary because it's based on
animus for something it's based on the
fact that you personally hate and fear
or something you're just against it
you're against exploitation of cows but
there's some other issue you're not
against that may be true maybe all right
maybe vegans just inexplicably have an
animus against the dairy industry maybe
so maybe people who quit smoking just
have an animus against tobacco maybe
it's based on animus but the point is
that does not invalidate the discourse
you can say back oh all legislation is
based on animus issues of arbitrary
distinctions are not the end of ethical
discourse they are the beginning but for
vegans were not yet even at that stage
we're at the stage of trying to get the
ten people gathered around the table to
draw the line of trying to call the
convention of trying to make people
aware this is an issue for modern
civilization as fundamental as the
ethics of war as fundamental of the as
the use of torture as the fundamental as
the conditions of prisoners and jails we
need to be drawing a line and we can
draw that line ten times until we get it
right but we're shifting from a view of
the world that refused to accept that
any such line could exist to a view of
the world that such a line must exist